one of the terrible things about
wokeness is that we're at risk of
destroying the very thing that we now
enjoy freedom because other countries
see that as weakness and they capitalize
on it how do you prove that threat is
real because this has already happened
and we'll get into this in more detail
Conant kiss is the sharp wited saturnist
podcast host and social commentator
unafraid to discuss some of the most
controversial topics and challenging
questions that Society is struggling
with ideology is a very bad thing
because the moment you buy into a
prepackaged set of ideas about what
you're supposed to believe you can very
quickly find yourself not interested in
the truth for example the ideology of
wokeness creates a very simplistic and
frankly ridiculous way of looking at
people not as individuals but as groups
with a hierarchy of Oppression and
promotion of victimhood which is what
makes them so dangerous because when you
teach people to be victims you actually
cause them to suffer in real life we're
weakening ourselves and now we censor
everything political labeling is a
weapon people use against their
opponents and political correctness is
preventing you from expressing a descent
opinion you can't say that that's hate
speech but as we spend more time arguing
about trivial issues instead of real
stuff that matters the dominant
civilization becomes more divided
especially from the inside and other
countries get to make a play for that
dominant position and it will mean that
the values of the west human rights
equality of treat and freedom of speech
those values will not be considered
values at all they don't want to hold
hands and sink Bay and I'm convinced
that the geopolitics we have seen in the
last many years would not be happening
if we were not signaling weakness in the
division is there a way to stop the
division here's what you
do question if you could sit at a table
with any four guests from the D CEO who
would you choose here's a challenge for
the entire D CEO Community if we hit 10
million subscribers by the end of
2024 you will get to pick four guests
for your dream conversation and you can
make it weird or you can make it
wonderful and here is the best part
3,000 of you that subscribe will be
invited to join this conversation live
in person and for free subscribe now and
let's make this happen
together
Constantine who are you and what do you
do and I have to add to that why did you
do
it my history is I was born in the late
Soviet Union and I grew up in that
Society watched the collapse as a young
man young boy actually um and then saw
the craziness of the emergence of modern
Russia which was an experience unlike
any other really it was pretty insane
what happened um and then there was a
very very brief window in my family's
time when we went from being very poor
when I was born to being very rich to
being very poor in the space of like 10
years and in the 5year period when my
family did have money they sent me to
boarding school in the UK and that's how
I I ended up here and then fast forward
a bunch of years um I started a podcast
with another
comedian called Francis Foster called
trigonometry we're about to hit a
million subscribers today which is
pretty exciting yeah and the reason I do
what I do is um I have a different
perspective to most people uh most
people who were born here grew up here
who take what we have here as a given
they take it for granted in my opinion
many people I've seen that the world is
not like this everywhere I've seen also
that societies don't necessarily last
forever uh cultures don't necessarily
last forever civilizations don't
necessarily last forever so the reason I
do what I do is I'm trying to remind
people in the west how privileged and
truly lucky we are to live in the
society and we've talked you know in the
last 10 years in particular so much
about different forms of privilege you
know male privilege White Privilege the
one form of privilege that we don't ever
talk about for some reason is Western
privilege and actually I believe that's
the one that we really should be talking
about and should be talking about from a
position of gratitude uh because we are
incredibly lucky to live uh in the west
uh and because we don't know that I
believe we're at risk of destroying the
very things that we now
enjoy an immigrants love letter to the
West is the title of your book it's I
love this title um for a variety of
reasons the word love is really
intentional why did you include the word
love
because how I feel you know um when
you've come to a place from outside it's
easier to see what makes it special uh
and so I'm incredibly grateful for the
opportunities that people like me enjoy
but actually all of us enjoy the freedom
to make of your life what you will the
freedom to speak your mind at least
until recently the freedom to pursue
things the freedom you know one of the
bedrocks of our societies is capitalism
now capitalism is based on the idea of
private property private property
doesn't really exist in most of the rest
of the world if you are a billionaire
even in Russia um you might be a
billionaire today but if you cross vad
Putin or whoever else might be in charge
you will go to prison and have all your
assets taken away from you and that's
what happened to Mel horovsky Jack ma in
China he made some comments about like
banking regulations it wasn't even
particularly controversial stuff and
then he disappears for a year and comes
back with you know completely different
set of opinions all of a sudden and
loses most of his money so we have the
luxury in in the west to do what we want
far more than any human beings have ever
had in the history of humanity and I
love that I love that freedom and I love
the the opportunities that I've had to
build my own life build my family's life
to give my son now opportunities that he
never would have enjoyed in a billion
years in another country so what is the
threat because you love the UK it's all
going great you know um what is the
threat that you see on the horizon and
how do you prove that threat is real if
you look at history and I'm no historian
but if you read interesting people about
history most civilizations are not
destroyed from the outside they're
destroyed through suicide uh through
cultural suicide and I think one of the
big threats I've been raising the alarm
on for a long time is what people talk
about as wo culture or Progressive you
know rampant progressivism whatever you
want to call it but at the heart of it
is the idea that we are bad our society
is bad it's based our history is bad
it's based on you know slavery and
colonialism and exploitation and
imperialism and all of this stuff and
how do you prove that well there's
several ways to think about it the first
one is if you thought your Society was
bad why would you defend it why would
you teach its values to your children
why would you want it to persevere and
continue to exist if you look
geopolitically in the last many years as
I've been predicting now for a long time
look at what happened in Ukraine look at
uh what happened in Afghanistan with the
withdrawal of American forces look at
what China is now doing in terms of how
muscular it's becoming about Taiwan as
the West loses confidence as the West
becomes more divided as the West becomes
more distracted as we spend more time
you know it's a tried thing to say but
as we spend more time arguing about what
a woman is instead of real stuff that
matters other people around the world
see that as weakness and they capitalize
on it and I'm convinced that the things
we have seen in terms of geopolitics in
the last many years would not be
happening happen if we were not
signaling weakness and division you
politically Affiliated at all do do you
consider yourself to be on the left or
the right or neither or well here's how
I think about it right uh my interest is
in our society
thriving our culture thriving our
culture doing better and uh I don't
think the right or the left is always
right it's contextual right there are
times when you want higher taxes and
more government spending there are times
when you want lower taxes and less
government spending there are times when
you need more immigration you know after
World War II Britain Australia Canada
many countries wanted more immigrants to
come because they needed to rebuild
their society uh there are times when
you need less immigration and so I think
it's about where you are in the moment
as opposed to these rigid ideological
positions like you know I am Pro
immigration I'm anti-immigration I think
both of those are pretty misguided
positions what you want is to be in the
right place at the right time so I don't
know if you've noticed this but it seems
to me like political labeling is now
mostly a weapon that people use against
their opponents right like if I don't
agree with you it's convenient for me to
label you as a member of the opposite
tribe so if I'm on the right well you're
a communist if I'm on the left well
you're far right and and this is how we
have conversation now um I have some
positions that are currently considered
rightwing I have some positions that are
currently considered leftwing and you
know I just one of the things I really
learned from my history and my family's
history and I talk about this in the
book as you know is that ideology is a
very bad thing always and so the moment
you buy into a prepackaged set of ideas
about what you're supposed to believe
you very quickly find yourself having to
believe things that you don't actually
agree with so that you get to stay in
the tribe mhm I don't care about the
tribe I care about the truth there's a
quote you um you referenced which uh I
actually sent to my friends earlier on
and I was talking to them um it is I
have no interest whatsoever in the false
dichotomy of right versus left if there
is one thing my Soviet childhood taught
me it's that subscribing to someone
else's ideology will always inevit
inevitably mean having to suspend your
own judgment about right and wrong to
appease your tribe which is on chapter
one of your book on page 21 and it
really
um you know as a podcaster when you
really want you're genuinely curious and
you want to interview lots of people
from lots of backgrounds the the great
thing about doing this job is I have to
teach myself to always look at the other
side so if you represent one side my job
in many respects is to try and
understand the other side so we can talk
about the other side as well to like
represent the other side and um that's
been really useful for me because it's
stopped me falling into the Trap of like
conforming with a tribe and also as you
say like when you talk about the right
and left thing being a label and a
weapon that people will use it's the
same when a journalist wants to write
about me what they'll do is they'll find
the most right-wing person that's ever
been on my podcast and they'll say he
interviews people like yes insert name
insert name yeah as if to say I am those
two people yes or in our case with
trigonometry what happens is we are
people who started our show because we
were pushing back against the woke
Progressive Dogma in our comedy industry
at the time and so a lot of our early
guests were exploring ing perspectives
that were not ours we were two remain
voters and when the remain when the
brexit vote happened we were really
confused because we were part of that
kind of elitist Metropolitan you know I
don't know anyone who voted brexit kind
of thing but my perspective was I found
it odd that people were saying well you
know the reason people voted for brexit
is because half the country is racist
and I was like I mean come on that
that's just factually incorrect we both
know that uh that's not to say the big
people don't exist and that doesn't mean
that some brex of Voters weren't racist
but to explain a complex phenomenon like
that by a simplistic explanation of that
just wasn't accurate so we had a lot of
people who were Pro brexit on the show
to understand where they're coming from
well one of the things that happens is
if you talk to a lot of people from one
side then the people from the other side
say what you just said well he's talk to
this this and this I won't go on his
show right and then they use that
against you to say well you only talk to
these people and like I'm like we've
we've invited your Owen Joneses and your
Ash sakas and all the others and Ash
should come on soon and and we've had
lots of people from different
perspectives but if I'm writing an
article about you or if I want to tweet
something about you it's very easy to
use what is wokeism as far as you see it
because the word kind of sounds like a
compliment it was initially it was a
self- compliment initially so wokeness
came along really in around 2014 and
there if you are interested we can talk
about why it does around that time
because it's a very interesting thing
that I actually think speaks to the
moment we're in more broadly um but it
was initially used by uh people
particularly kind of black lives matter
and racial activists in America about
themselves and what they were saying is
we are awakened to certain realizations
realizations like what they call
intersectionality which is the idea that
you know different racial and sexual and
other groups and Society are treated
differently um and we're now awake to
this that's what wokeness meant and now
we are aware these systemic forces that
are disadvantaging certain groups and
now we're going to pursue activism
that's designed to address you know
white privilege male privilege and all
of this other stuff but very quickly
what happened is a lot of people looked
at some of the ways these people were
behaving and other people around them
were behaving and started making fun of
it which is what often happens and so
now the word work is kind of an insult
that's being used to say these people
are somewhat detached from reality and
they're obsessed about trivial issues um
that don't actually have much bearing on
reality they're not interested in facts
they're interested in narratives and so
on um but if you're asking me what woke
culture really is it's a combination of
things first and foremost it's the
promotion and celebration of
victimhood first and foremost then you
take that victimhood and you say
different groups are differently
victimized some groups are victimized so
black people ethnic minorities women U
and by the way of course there's a
kernel truth to all these things right
uh certain groups
are disadvantaged in society or perhaps
a better way of saying is generally
speaking have worse outcomes than others
and that you know we can explore why
that is in in more detail um but what we
then do is we build a a hierarchy of
Oppression some groups are more
oppressed than others which makes them
better morally Superior to others and
there are some other groups that are
suspect because they're doing better so
this ideology kind of says the way to
work out who is oppressed and who is the
oppressor because if you have the
oppressed you have to have someone who's
oppressing them we can't say you know
different groups do different in society
for all sorts of different reasons if
someone is not doing as well as someone
else that's because they've been
oppressed right uh and then you work out
this hierarchy you know white people are
the evil at the top uh you throw in some
other successful minorities you know for
example uh in the UK and in
America uh Asians from the Far East
Chinese Koreans Japanese they do very
well right so they are now seen as part
of the kind of more the oppressor groups
that's why in American colleges for
example they're discriminated against in
admissions because they do better than
Hispanics and and blacks right so uh
it's essentially a way of creating a
very very simplistic and frankly
ridiculous way of looking at people not
as individuals you know Steven
Constantin but as groups black white
russian Jewish whatever way you want to
look at it and it's this generalized
thing and one of the reasons it's so
destructive is it's asking all the wrong
questions it's it's asking the question
of why do why why are people struggling
right but it doesn't ask it from the
right perspective the real you know
poverty is the norm the real question is
what creates Prosperity what creates
success uccess what creates uh
successful outcomes for different groups
and if you just focus on you know what
happened to a certain group 200 years
ago you're really not going to get to
the answer of how to uplift people in in
the present moment so it's the elevation
of victimhood it's Obsession about
racial and sexual and gender Dynamics um
and it's the promotion of a kind of
anti-western anti- white anti-male
ideology uh that I believe is very very
dangerous to actually the very great
societies that we've created which are
based on the idea that you know I have
some issues with multiculturalism but a
multiracial society I think is a very
healthy thing provided we are not
encouraged to see each other as members
of separate and divided tribes but that
is exactly what this ideology does what
is the harm of victimhood and how does
how is that like really showing up in
people's everyday lives from an
individual standpoint and so I really
want to know like the how victimhood is
becoming self harm so if I choose to
adopt a victimhood mindset how does that
hurt me Steven well oh I mean there's a
hundred different ways but one of the
the thing things we know from psychology
is what they call perception is
projection I don't know if you're
familiar with this idea okay you've had
Jordan Peterson on the show right so one
of the things he talks about is you
cannot see unless you have a hierarchy
of value in your mind right there is an
almost unlimited number of things I
could be looking at in this room there's
a bunch of books behind you there's
cameras in the room your producers over
there there's a wall there's lights
there's all kinds of things but I'm
looking at you why because in this
moment you're the most important thing
that's happening to me in this room
right our
conversation however if I walk into this
room and I am triggered by
books right I wouldn't be able to focus
on you I would be be a only be able to
focus on what's behind you right now
let's say you walk around thinking that
because of your racial background
everyone's out to get you well what are
you going to see out in the world you're
going to see people look at you funny
now people look at you funny for all
sorts of different reasons people look
at me funny people look at women funny
people look at men funny for all sorts
of different reasons you might walk past
the police officer and you might think
well I know that my racial background
makes me a victim of police brutality
therefore I'm going to be on edge what
does that mean well if a police officer
says something to me to you you might
interpret it differently than you might
have done as if you were just a normal
guy right and on and on it goes so you
bring your perceptual filters into every
situation and therefore the outcomes
that you experience are predetermined to
a very significant part not by the other
people but by your own expectations and
so when you teach people to be victims
you make them victims you actually cause
them to suffer in real life and the
people who need to be resilient and
strong and to be taught that you may be
mistreated sometimes by different people
but you have the capacity to overcome
that you have the capacity to make that
you can be whoever you want you live in
a free Society where no one can stop you
the people who need that message the
most are the people who are actually
victims the people who actually suffer
discrimination the people who actually
come from difficult backgrounds they
need that message more than anyone it
reminded me of that video I saw you do
or feat in where you talk about the scar
experiment which
um made it very real for anyone that
hasn't seen that video what was that
experiment basically what they did is
they took a bunch of people I think it
was mostly women some men and they said
to them what we're doing today so they
set the frame what we're doing today is
we are doing an experiment to find out
how people with uh facial disfigurements
are treated in society and they put
scarring on their face in front of a mow
so they could see that they had some
really serious facial disfigurements and
as they were leaving the
room they said you know what we just
need to touch touch that scar up a
little bit more and they removed the
scarring so these people went into what
was set up as a job interview thinking
they had scars on their face but the
scarring had been removed without their
knowledge and when they walked into
those interviews when they came out they
were asked a bunch of questions and what
people found was they had massively
increased levels of
discrimination for their facial
disfigurements they reported specific
comments that the interviews had made
about their face even though they had no
scaring at all they brought their
expectation in with them and they came
out with the result that they were
looking for so they believed they were
discriminated against yeah so I I read
about something called stereotype threat
um which talks about how if you remind a
group of people whether that's black
people or women or whoever it might be
about a stereotype um or factor that
relates to a stereotype before they do a
test then they perform worse than the
test and and I guess I don't know if
this is a Counterpoint to this but so if
I'm a black person and there's a
stereotype that black people aren't good
at maths just by asking someone on a
test to fill in their ethnicity before
they do the math test drops their scores
on the math test right which I I believe
is the Crux of the experiment and this
this kind of proves
that I guess it's a few things I guess
it's someone believing that they are as
a disadvantage causes a disadvantage in
performance but it also highlights if
that's like an innate thing it also
points to the power of these these
stereotypes totally but it's not the
power of the stereotypes it's the power
of the brainwashing right because what
what that what when someone says to you
there's The Stereotype it's not just the
stereotype alone it's also the fact that
they've told you that reinforces it for
you right because you might be aware of
the stereotype of a peripheral level but
you're like no I'm good at mass and
that's it but it's when other people
come in and tell you stuff that's when
that social proof is also reinforcing it
sometimes they tell you it in a
well-meaning way yeah yeah but that
doesn't change it right but you're not
saying we shouldn't tell people at all
well I I don't know that the stereotype
that black people aren't good at math is
true I I think what we should tell
people is you can be whatever the hell
you want uh and you might be terrible at
math that's okay you might be good at
some other things but the thing you
should really do is do your best and
find out the result you get I asked this
question I flashback when I was 18 years
old and I was thinking of starting my
first business and I discovered that
there's this special like loan or Grant
you could get if you were black and as I
sat there I remember being sat there on
Facebook typing out this post which I
never posted where I basically was like
this seeing that this exists has made me
feel like I'm at a disadvantage the
existence of this thing but it's
well-meaning like they wanted to give
grants to people that were black but
part of me if you read between the lines
of what that says it says because you
are black you have a disadvantage right
and then when I sort of overlap that
with what I know about stereotype
threats I'm like did the existence of
that grant program make me more hopeful
and self-elaboration
they are incredibly well-meaning they're
incredibly well- meaning which is what
makes them so dangerous because um I
always forget this quote but there's a
there's a wonderful quote about this
which is that a tyranny exercised for
your own good is much worse than a
tyranny that's exercised out of pure
evil because at least the evil person
knows they're being evil but when
someone is trying to help you by being
tyrannical towards you I mean this is a
different context but the point is the
same when someone is doing something to
you because they think they're try
they're helping they are not held back
by their conscience at all mhm and so
they will do whatever the hell they
think is the right thing in order to
help you what might be a good way of
helping people who who come from
backgrounds where there is less
entrepreneurial success and maybe that
is the case I don't know what the
statistics are is you know creating a
school of black business Excellence
right like here's here's 10 guys like
you who come in and talk about how you
were great and here's some tips and
here's what you do and here's what I did
inspiration right now look I don't buy
personally into this idea that like
there's this Narrative of you can't be
what you can't see I think that's one of
the most pernicious and dangerous ideas
that we've seen in recent years um but
to the extent that there are people who
who need someone who looks like them
maybe that's that's the way that you do
it um there is a great writer American
writer called Thomas soul I don't know
if you're familiar with his work not
brother if you read his stuff you will
you will be hooked one of the things he
talks about uh is the fact that um over
the last 30 40 years we have replaced
things that work with things that sound
good and so much of what we now do in
our society is things that sound good
like that program but don't actually
help anyone they don't actually work
very well um and when we talked about
why wokeness really takes off in 2014
one of the reasons I believe and there's
a lot of evidence for this and you can
look this up and even maybe flash up
some graphs about this when social media
comes
along that's when this stuff really
takes off because social media is
completely detached from The Real World
and social media because of that
promotes things that sound good that
make us feel good about how Progressive
we are virtuous virtuous but don't
actually achieve anything because in the
isolated context of Twitter or Facebook
or whatever you don't have the feedback
mechanism of Smashing your head on the
floor if you walk the wrong way or
whatever whatever it is right um so we
do a lot of things in our society now uh
that practically don't get the results
that we'd like them to get but they make
us feel incredibly good about how
Progressive like the black tile the
black tile during the BLM movement right
there was the everyone posted a black
tole on Tuesday right right right and
then if you didn't post the black tile
you're attacked for being racist yeah
yeah I just thought Instagram was broken
for a
day no I remember doing a post at the
time saying that I thought this was
ridiculous like and really the the the
part of it that was ridiculous was um
attacking people that hadn't done it uh
which exists under this assumption that
the normal thing to to do the normal
response to seeing a horrific video
where someone is suffocated to death is
to take to social media and post about
it like in fact that's the most unhuman
unnatural response to seeing something
which is quite troubling yeah um but The
Virtuous thing to do obviously that CL
the likes would be to fall in line and
if you look at that Stephen not to get
you know too far into the weeds of it
but one of the respons respers to that
terrible uh killing of George Floyd was
that a lot of people decided to take a
lot of understandable frustrations out
on policing and the police more broadly
and what happened is that a lot of the
police pulled back in several cities in
America and a lot of black people have
been killed as a result because there's
less police to actually keep the peace
and protect people from criminals so
that was another example of where an
understandable emotional reaction gets
converted into very bad action that's
counterproductive for the very community
that in that instance we were trying to
protect you said something a second ago
you said you don't believe that you need
to see it to believe it yeah like I
believe that and it speaks to a broader
thing which is I I I think that you and
I having spoken to you beforehand and
you know we have big podcasts and
whatever you and I probably have a
better understanding and more similar
values around certain things then we
would do people of our own background
and that's because people aren't just
these stupid super icial things right so
when we talk about you need to see
someone like you succeed I'm like well I
didn't I didn't need to look at someone
who looked like me to be successful I
saw people in America doing podcasts
about the similar talking about stuff
that I wanted to talk about I was like
oh great maybe I can try that and then I
did you know and I think teaching people
that is going to open the doors for way
more people from Minority backgrounds
than teaching them that there's this one
guy
who looks like them that's been
successful I just I don't see it that
way I think the truth of of modern
Western society and this is why where we
started the conversation why we're so
lucky is that if you're talented if
you're driven if you're willing to work
on yourself if you're willing to read
and grow and and and have a goget a
mindset the world's your Royster it
doesn't matter what your skin color is
it's interesting because I I reflect on
when I started in business and for
whatever reason I had a lot of Role
Models All Around the World you know
whether it was Sir Richard Branson
studying his story or other people but I
I you two look incredibly similar I've
met him he's we're very very different
but you know he's a very very kind man
um but Jamal Edwards who was a young
black man probably the most famous young
black business person in the UK I was
obsessed with because there was
something about him and his story that
killed my excuses and it kills your
victimhood MH which is if someone who
was a young black man who is walk up
that ladder you're trying to walk up and
they don't come from money and they had
a job in I think Top Shop normal dude
didn't have like a you know incredible
education Oxford you go I've got no
excuse right and that's and that that
part of it I've always rated which is if
someone like you is walked in those
footsteps before it helps kill your
excuses and it gives you no reason sure
but think about what that meant for you
though what you're talking about is
undoing the brand the brainwashing that
already existed yeah right yeah yeah
yeah yeah yeah so it's not that like you
you needed a black person you needed
someone who you could look at and say oh
no no all this stuff I've been
brainwashed into thinking isn't true but
on the point of brainwashing yeah it is
objectively true that if I I think if
you if you look at studies where they
take someone with a name that is
associated with a certain race and they
like sent a thousand emails for a job
application you're much more likely to
get the job if you're called John yes
than like lante sure or
Constantine like you're called Steven
yeah yeah my parents nailed it they
probably nailed it but we we could slice
this a billion different ways yeah you
could say look I'm 5'9 barely right if
you look at the CEOs CEOs of the top
Fortune 500 companies they're all over
six foot basically um the tallest
president presidential candidate in
America almost always win wins like
height heightism height discrimination
is massive especially against men what
am I going to do well I'm gonna complain
about that I'm gonna sit there and go oh
I'm 5'9 it's not going to change
anything right so the only thing the
only option I have is do I take this and
run with it do I make it a strength of
some kind do I compensate for it
elsewhere MH or do I wallow in my
victimhood those are the choices man
yeah no one's going to make you grow can
you acknowledge that the brainwashing
exists that it's in in part objectively
true sure but it's also not a not reason
enough to become a victim sure okay but
that's all I'm saying myself my point is
that look of course different people are
treated differently and it's different
in different ways right like for example
I'm a first generation immigrant in this
country some people will see that as a
Bad Thing other people will see that as
a good thing right there are tradeoffs
to everything right being an outsider is
often bad but sometimes good so the only
thing that you can do is play the cards
that life has D you
right and so going i' I've been dealt
you could look people are free to do
whatever they want with their life if
you want to sit there and say you've
been dealt a bad hand of cards I'll
agree with you I mean fine you have but
it's not going to help you it's not
going to help you and what I want for
people is to thrive I want them to
thrive I want them to create the life
that they want and I know for a fact you
know I've been the son of very wealthy
people I've slept in a park in Edinburgh
for weeks because I couldn't afford Ren
the only person that is going to change
your life is you no one's coming to save
you no one's coming to rescue you no one
the Cavalry isn't coming it's just you
and you have the opportunity to take the
cards you've been dealt with and convert
them into the best possible outcome and
for some people having a job is
incredible taking the life that they've
been given and just having a job that
they can hold down and provide for their
family that in itself is a massive
achievement for others the sky is the
limit but you only get this one set of
cards and you only get to play it once
do you want to sit there and complain
that you were born with the wrong
genitals or the wrong skin color or
whatever or do you want to just play the
hand to the best of your ability that's
the choice it's interesting because you
said you want to help them Thrive yeah
and I think if you asked some of those
people they'd say they also want to
thrive and maybe they see the victimhood
as their path to thriving you know what
I mean that's just a cop out man that
like identity like because if I if I
become a victim then I have this group
of people and then they're going to be
nice to me and we're going to reinforce
each other and we you too me you know
like sure but it's not going to actually
help you it makes you feel good makes
you feel understood and everyone gets
does it make your life
better does it do you earn more money
does is your business more successful
well if you're like a diversity
consultant it does right but for
everyone else does it make your life
better first of all it makes you feel
awful right and we've all been there
we've all felt victims in certain
different situations because we've all
been victimized in in one way or another
you know whether it's a traumatic
childhood or things happen to you you
know uh all kinds of things happen to
people but ultimately you go talk to any
any good therapist or psychologists
they're not going to say to you yeah
yeah oh yeah you're really oppressed
yeah they're going to say this this is
your opportunity to grow this is your
opportunity to overcome yes we accept
that the things that happened to you
were wrong and bad and whatever but it's
acceptance and then you move on that's
how life Works do you think there's
differences in Generations as it relates
to this attitude what are you seeing
when it comes to like generation Zed as
they call them and how does that vary
from
Millennials some of the stuff that I we
have genz people working for us at
trigonometry and I'm like some of the
things about them are incredible young
people are always amazing because
they've had the benefit of learning
stuff like knowing stuff that we had to
learn right like I had to learn this
they just get given it on YouTube or
whatever they can watch a video
and like for 10 minutes and no stuff
that it took me 20 years to unpack right
um on the one hand on the other hand
this is a generalization you can't
generalize about people but my
experience is in the workplace for
example they they think about their role
in in such a disproportionately
grandiose way comp like we had I
remember Francis and I my co and try I
used to help him run a comedy club and
there were people who would who would
they literally just came in to help out
they were effectively doing an unpaid
internship and they'd like pipe up in
meetings and be like I think we should
do it like this like for my generation
you know the idea that I'd like say
anything in that meeting would have been
completely Preposterous you know what I
mean but look um every generation has
its own challenges I don't envy jenzi
because they grew up with phones from
day one and we are starting to to
realize I think probably 20 years from
now we will look at phones like we look
at tobacco companies 30 or 40 years ago
like the fact that young people were
given smartphones from the age of 3 four
5 six or whatever that was just kind of
Cruelty really I think and we're
starting to find that out so uh it's
look it's very easy always to to slag
off young people um I we need them we
need them to be the best versions of
themselves so I'm always thinking about
encouraging and lifting them up and
mentoring and and all of that certainly
the people that I know from that
generation but they do face unique
challenges and and kind of smacking some
of that self-centeredness out of them is
part of it you hopeful for
them I'm very torn about this more
generally as well I'm someone who's
incredibly optimistic
personally as I look out of the world
today I'm not optimistic about the world
I am optimistic personally so it's a
it's a very weird thing I think that as
I say I think gen Z they've had some
really difficult things imposed on them
by their parents and of structure and
discipline imposed on them by their
parents on the other hand they have
tremendous opportunities too so I guess
it just remains to be
seen you're not optimistic about the
world definitely not definitely why well
we started talking about I think the
West undermining itself um whether you
think the West is good or bad is kind of
irrelevant for this part of
it when the the the the civilization
that is
dominant which is us there's six great
civilizations in the world today Western
Civilization who are the descendants of
the Western Roman Empire Eastern
Christian civilization who had descended
from Byzantium the Eastern Christian
Romans Empire so that's the center of
that Civilization is Russia now uh the
two Islamic civilizations the Arabs and
the Persians Persians Iran China and
India the Chinese and the Indians
right Western Civilization has been
dominant around the world for many many
centuries now
when the dominant civilization becomes
weakened especially from the inside
whichever one that is what that opens up
is what Vladimir Putin and Xi Jinping
and others are now talking about this is
what they mean when they talk about the
multi-polar world what they mean is they
get to
play they get to make a play for that
dominant position they don't no one
wants to No One Vladimir putins and the
XI Jin p don't want to sing you know
hold hands and sing Kumbaya that's not
what they're into they want to be the
dominant Force like America has been for
a very long time and so when when the
king of the H Hill gets weaker and
signals weakness to others what happens
is conflict that's what happens so even
if you don't think Western values are
good values which I happen to think they
are for reasons we can get into the fact
that we are increasing the level of
conflict around the world by signaling
weakness I think is a bad thing right so
Ukraine is a very good example of that
whether Taiwan happens as some people
are predicting or we don't know it's not
a good thing if you look at what
happened in Israel the reason Hamas felt
comfortable to attack Israel on October
7th is he did is the Iranians who back
Hamas feel comfortable in challenging
Israel because Israel is America's Ally
in the Middle East right so there is
this great game being played and and it
is about throwing the West up its
pedestal
so even if you weren't comfortable with
the West's dominance the fact that it is
likely coming to an end is a bad thing
for the world in the interim because it
means there's more conflict uh and
there's more violence uh and there's
more strife and there's more Discord and
just to be clear the reason why it's
coming to an end in your view is because
of the internal Division and the
internal
conflict that's part of it look it's a
look the the the the rise and decline of
civilizations is a very complicated
thing part of it is economic right but
even if you look at our economic
problems um the biggest problem that
Western countries face is our level of
debt right look at debt as a societal
issue national debt what does that mean
well one of the things it means is we've
we've broken the intergenerational
conflict uh intergenerational contract
between your generation your children's
generation and the generation before
yours and mine right effectively our
parents are unwilling to sacrifice for
their grandchildren that's what debt
means because what we're doing is we're
borrowing from the future right we are
operating at more than 100% GDP debt at
the moment and we're increasing it all
the time because we're running deficits
America is borrowing like crazy what
does that mean you and I are not going
to be even you and I are not going to be
paying it off our children will right is
that the behavior of people who feel
like they're one that they're United
that they're looking after the Next
Generation look at
GDP per capita I mean one of the reasons
uh we have uh levels of mass immigration
that we do today politicians will tell
you we need Mass immigration to boost
our economy and they're only half Ling
um they're they're telling you that
because it's true in order that they can
pretend our GDP is growing we need to
bring in more people but our GDP per
capita is falling and has been for some
time so the Gen Z generation are going
to be poorer than you and
I is that a reflection of a society that
is cohesive is reflection of a society
that feels like it's one that we're
looking after the Next Generation which
is our first Duty as people right U so
even our economic problems which are
significant in my opinion are partly
because of the cultural malays that we
experience and then everything flows
from that as we talked about at the
beginning if you brainwash people for
decades now to think that their society
is bad and wrong and evil well they're
not going to be willing to advance its
interest they're not going to be able to
go and fight and defend it in war it's
Etc we're weakening ourselves who's
doing the
brainwashing a lot of it has been
happening in Academia since the 60s so
Educators uh who were uh being
encouraged and funded and supported by
my boys from the Soviet Union at the
time to demoralize the West they
encouraged a lot of these marxists and
one of the things we haven't yet touched
on is um the ideology of wokeness is
really a new form of Marxism it's a kind
of race Marxism I know this sounds like
very abstract and crazy I don't know if
it does to you but maybe to many people
in your audience so perhaps I can lay it
out a little bit can you explain what
Marxism is well sure so Marxism was an
ideology created obviously by KL marks
and Angel who who funded him and
assisted him and the idea was very
simple uh the idea was that the way to
understand human society is through the
lens of Oppression we we've talked about
this before right there are some people
who are the oppressors and some people
who are oppressed who are the oppressors
in Marx's original idea the oppressors
were the Bourgeois the cap the people
who owned what he called the means of
production the factories the the capital
the stock like you are you are now a
member of the Bourgeois a capitalist you
own a business right and what he said
was that you are oppressing your
producer and everyone who works for you
because you take their labor and you
profit from it without giving them back
the right amount of value in exchange um
and by the way just like with a lot of
these other ideas it was true in the
sense that Marxism really is a reaction
to the rampant abuse that was caused by
the Industrial Revolution in which you
know you had people sleeping in
factories and chimney sweeps that were
12 years old up chimneys you know dying
all of that right so as with all of
these ideas there is a kernel of truth
but what he said and you know the people
who really practiced this idea the most
were the Soviets and the Chinese
Communist is well how do you solve this
problem oh very simple you got to take
from the oppressors and you got to give
to the oppressor
from each according to his ability to
each according to his needs however the
problem is it turns out that communism
is effectively a great idea at the
family level like your family is a
communist Society so is mine like I go
out to work I earn money we spend it
together on the needs of my wife my
children blah blah blah that's communism
right we share what one productive
person produces other people do other
jobs they may not be paid as well blah
blah
blah the level of society doesn't really
work because people are self-interested
and to make them not self-interested to
make them all give up everything for the
needs of the state and other other
people you have to use a lot of force
right which is why you have to kill 50
million people in Russia 50 million
people in China to even make it happen
now what happened was you got to
remember this is very important people
forget this when the Soviet Union was
created it was not designed to be a
Countrywide phenomenon the communist
belied that the only rightly by the way
that the only way communism would work
is if you made everyone in the world
communist because if you made everyone
communist then no one could look at over
the border and look at these evil
capitalists having a great life everyone
would be equally poor and then they'd be
happy that was the idea right um and so
the idea of the the Russian
Revolution wasn't about making Russia
Communists communist it was about making
the world communist it was the world
Revolution that's why the Soviet Union
the the the the symbolism of the Soviet
Union it never had anything to do with
Russia or the Soviet Union on the flag
it had the globe and the hammer and
sickle the point was this ideology was
meant to spread to the entire world the
problem was that when people saw what
was actually happening in the Soviet
Union they really didn't want that and
most of all people in Western societies
including the working class who was
supposed to be the oppressed and to
overthrow their oppressive people they
didn't want that they just wanted to
have a nice life and to have a house and
to blah blah blah um and so the Marxist
in the west they very quickly realized
that this wasn't going to work Western
workingclass people were not going to
overthrow the existing regime and have a
a Soviet style Revolution where they
slaughter all the bouris and the
capitalist so they had to find a
different way to approach it which is
why they invented this form of race
Marxism they said no no no you're not no
you're not really oppressed cuz you're
working class and you don't have Capital
the reason you you're oppressed is
you're a man you're gay you're black
you're this you're that and that really
landed with people particularly
multiethnic societies like ours where we
have a lot of people from Minority
backgrounds um it coincided with the
sexual Revolution I know you've had my
friend Lis Perry on the show yeah uh I
don't know if you talked about this but
the pill basically changes the
relationship between men and women women
are liberated so now a lot of this stuff
also happens and so what happened in the
60s is a lot of Educators in Academia
started teaching these ideas to students
and then you have successive generations
of people who are now essentially
trained to think that our societies were
bad uh what they were was about
oppression racism bigotry imperialism uh
colonialism slavery Etc uh which all of
these things have a kernel of Truth and
that kernel of Truth is used to tell
gigantic lies and cuz I because often
when we we talk about this division
that's happening internally Within West
we think of it as the other side of
doing it but a second ago you really
pointed at forces far a field are
tinkering and actually there was a story
this week I think or last week where a
podcaster has been I think like arrested
and had her channels deleted because it
turns out I didn't go deep into the
story she hasn't been arrested but yes
perhaps I can just summarize it quickly
so there was a company in America called
tenant media who were given $10 million
in a very short period of time so I'm
sure it would have been more by a
Russian today
Affiliated uh influencers and various
nefarious actors from Russia effectively
to uh disseminate certain types of
information through right-wing
influences in America and this has been
happening for decades there's a guy
called Yuri basmanov if you're not
familiar with him this guy's going to
blow your mind you should look him up he
was a Soviet Defector uh in the 80s who
came uh from the Soviet Union to India
to Canada ended up in America he gave
series of lectures which people can
watch on YouTube about what the Soviet
intelligence Services were actually
focusing on because during the Cold War
you might not remember this but you know
people thought about Soviet spies as
like stealing microfilms of American
nuclear installations and all of this
stuff actually what he said was almost
all of their resources were used on what
he called
demoralization and demoralization is the
process whereby you divide Society and
you activate nefarious forces within
that Society against the society so you
encourage forces that are destabilizing
this is one thing that people don't
understand about Russian misinformation
disinformation influence operations Etc
they're not designed to get a specific
person elected this is how British
people and Americans think they're like
you know well I invest $10 million to
get this outcome it's not what they do
what they want is to create a cacophony
of Lies so that you don't know what to
believe anymore is this true is that
true and so they were they are and were
and have always been paying people in
the west or using people in the west to
seow Discord to divide people against
each other to say uh the Soviet Union by
the way was very active in in funding
militant uh African-American groups uh
in the 60s and 70s and 80s in America
and in fact whenever people would say to
uh the Soviets well look you're like
starving millions of people and putting
them in gags by would say well what
about black people in America they're
you don't treat them well right so who
are you to tell us about all of this
stuff so by the way this isn't like um a
unique thing like America does this too
America Funds liberal organizations in
Russia to get Russian liberals to act in
their interest this is what all
civilizations do I'm just saying maybe
we should protect our civilization from
this foreign influence so yes uh foreign
forces are at play but you can't like no
I I don't know I imagine there's no
amount of money that people could give
you to spread Russian propaganda on this
show there's no amount of money that
people could give me to spread Russian
propaganda or Chinese propaganda on my
show what they do is they find people
who already agree with them and then
they amplify their voice using money and
influence and say look we'll we'll we'll
give you you know we'll give you $10
million and you can come to this great
conference we'll we'll give you an
opportunity to interview this guy who's
close to Vladimir Putin or or this guy
who who says this or that person or this
person and they they just take the
forces within our society that already
destabilizing and they amplify them so
this podcaster in the United States it
was tenant media is that one podcast or
is that a network of podcasts so what
happened is they had a network of
podcasters underneath them who is
according to the indictment they were
all being used so they didn't know they
were being paid by Russia okay U they
were just all being used and never now
and again again we don't know the full
details but it would be like hey have
you seen this new story like the
ukrainians might have been involved in
the terrorist attack in Russia maybe you
should cover it and one of them did
stuff like that okay and they weren't
necessarily picking a side were they no
they were picking a side oh so they were
Pro Trump or Pro Cala or well they were
mostly right-wing influences uh but the
person in question whose name is Lauren
Chen she actually started agitating
people against Donald Trump at one point
which is my point they are not trying to
get a particular person elected they are
trying to make you go who do I vote
what's going like just to to confuse
everybody to the point that they don't
know what to believe and they don't know
what to think and they don't know what
to do looks like it's working that's my
point which is why we need in the west
to have a very clear idea of who we are
where we're going how we got here what
makes our society successful where we've
come from and to reject the lies about
our history because this is why uh both
the crazy left and the crazy right want
to revise our history
so that we don't know who we are anymore
so that we can't say well actually
Britain is a great country and has done
incredible things for the world right uh
you know Britain is the country that has
the first modern Parliament it's a
country that spread democracy around it
it's a country that actually the first
Empire in history that ended slavery it
ended
slavery it didn't invent it it ended it
slavery was the norm and then the
British came along practiced slavery
just like everybody else and a terrible
thing it was and then they spent a
tremendous amount of blood money and
treasure to end slavery not only within
the British Empire they spent a huge
amount of diplomatic military and
financial Capital to for to force other
countries to end slavery in those
countries as well right but that's not
what you're being taught in school right
now is it no and and that's the problem
because if you think of your society as
based on these terrible things well why
would you want its values to persevere
and continue in the future it may be
wonder if there there is any hope or any
solution to this because immediately as
I was thinking is there a way to stop
the division and most of the division
actually happens on the internet now
it's not like we're out on the streets
and the way the algorithms work is they
reinforce an opinion so you get
literally like coins at the casino for
saying something where a big group of
people clap and Nuance is like the enemy
of social media growth I think like if
you if like if you express a solution to
a problem as complex and nuanced who the
[__] who the [__] wants to hear a
complex Nuance like really that that I
think there's much more reward for me to
say this is bad yes or this is amazingly
good and if you're in either of those
camps you know exactly who's clapping
yes whereas in the middle as we've kind
of you probably experienced it a lot as
a
podcaster um like you don't get the
support the full support of either side
maybe maybe the middle exists I don't
know well the center is the place of
greatest tension it always is because
you're getting fire from both sides uh
and picking a tribe is always much more
comfortable and more convenient but this
is where I think actually the beauty of
the internet is too
like 20 years ago you and I both would
have had some kind of rich
funer not me or you but someone who
actually had loads of money who would be
funding this and telling you what you
supposed to talk
about I don't have to give a [__] what
anyone thinks there is an audience out
there for the nuanced balanced here's
the thing I think about this but also
about this take
and you know look yes absolutely uh you
know if you're Andrew Tay you're going
to get a bigger audience saying what
you're saying or the equivalent of of
the left whatever that looks like uh
then I might but yeah I'm very happy
with a million subscribers on YouTube
I'm very happy that 60,000 people read
my substacks every week and that's
growing too there is a market out there
for everybody and then ultimately I
think it comes down to is who are you
and who do you want to be I didn't get
into this to be the richest or the most
successful podcaster in the world I got
into this because I wanted to promote
critical thinking I wanted to promote
the truth and the pursuit of truth I
don't claim to know the truth but I'm
trying to find out what it is um and I
wanted people in the west to remember
what they have to be grateful for it to
defend it uh to stand up for the values
that made these societ is great you said
a second ago that we've we need to
remember who we are um if we are going
to be successful as society and one of
the things that did sort of anchor Us in
values was religion yes and I'm um I I
was born to a very religious Christian
family um went to church a lot when we
were younger um my mother's still
extremely religious my father is
religious as well I believe I still
think he's religious and at about 18 or
19 years old I discovered Like Richard
Dawkins books and had this like
existential crisis for two
[Music]
years and then after the existential
crisis which lasted two years and me
like you know really trying to find the
answers I kind of was just at piece with
it and I would class myself now as being
agnostic yeah but in the last six months
I classed myself as being
agnostic but you're by curious now my
Curious yeah it's like you're God
curious you can always feel me going
back to the beginning again but much of
that I think is what you described which
is because we've become more
individualistic more lonely all these
kinds of things we're now searching for
purpose again yes and for for values
that are anchored in something yes um I
wondered what your take was on the
impact that us becoming a more atheist
Society has had on all these things look
I an agnostic myself um I that's not to
say that I think you know I'm not a
materialist in the sense that like this
is it right it's definitely not it and I
know that experientially I know that
there are ways that human beings connect
that are Way Beyond you know the things
that we can see with our eyes and hear
with our ears uh there are powerful
forces in this world that are spiritual
in nature these are not things I can
prove and I have no intention of trying
but they exist
um but there's no question that the the
the decline of religion has meant that
people are lacking meaning and lacking
purpose and lacking guidance and lacking
discipline and lacking a set of rails in
which to live their lives
um the the hope is that from that comes
something else um you know there have
been many great religions throughout
history there's no reason to say that
the ones we currently have are the last
ones we're ever going to have um God
knows what AI is going to do to our
sense of who we are and what our purpose
is and what our mission is um and also
you
know there is purpose to be found in
other things you you know if if you are
fortunate enough like me to become a
father at some point that really changes
your perspective on so many different
things and and gives you a sense of
meaning and purpose I'm sure your work
is very meaningful to you um but yes at
a societal level uh uh the death of
religion is has been very impactful in
that way for sure do you think we'd be
better if we went back to being more
religious as a society forgive me but
that's a stupid question because you
can't go back really no you can't go
back to anything the part of the reason
we are less religious is the the
material circumstances of our lives have
changed very dramatically
um and you can't put the toothpaste back
in the tube you can go forward and
that's what I'm alluding to uh I don't
think the the religious age is over I
mean human beings clearly have a
religious Instinct that has lasted
through Through the Ages and usually
religion has been there to explain to us
the things that we do not understand I
think that with a lot of the
technological breakthroughs that we're
about to see there's going to be a whole
range of things that I don't even know
what they are that we we're not going to
understand exactly and the spiritual
attitude we take to those things may be
different yet again we'll find out or a
lot of people will go to religion but I
don't think they're going to go to like
the 960s version of it do you know what
I mean yeah and I I think I think about
I read some work that said that a lot of
young Western men in particular were
choosing Islam obviously we've seen
people like Andrew Tate as well make the
decision but that there was this rise in
Young Western men deciding to come out
or convert to Islam that makes sense
that makes a lot of sense why uh because
a Islam is a religion that offers
particularly men quite a lot of the
things that they really
want right discipline
structure uh reward mhm uh
Community
um the I mean one of the things about
Islam when you contrast it against
Christianity and and Western values
today's Western values more broadly is
Islam like very few other things is is
one of the ideologies that still allows
men to be strong and confident right in
modern Western Society what is a man
supposed to be look at your adverts look
at your movies look at everything man's
supposed to be this PA
pathetic weak uh you second to his
strong female counterpart right uh men
are supposed to step back and make space
and all of this Islam says no no no
you're you're the man that's always
going to be appealing to men who who
increasingly feel particularly younger
men who in many ways they've got the
short end of the stick while being told
that they are privileged and blah blah
blah blah blah like young men are not in
positions of privilege in in our society
now they do worse in education they do
worse in all sorts of other things and
at the same time they're being demonized
right it's very natural that their
response to that is going to be things
like that and you know people often talk
about Andrew Tay as a very problematic
figure which certainly is but to me the
blame he's to me is the symptom of a of
of a much bigger underlying wider
problem like my
generation's version of that was Jordan
Peterson who I thought was a very
constructive force and still is I had
the privilege of touring with him in
America this year and was incredible and
he's a very positive constructive person
but the more you try to prevent men from
being men the more you're going to get
the backlash and I think people joining
Islam following these hyper masculine
influences going to like one of the
reasons if you notice loads of guys are
like now into going to the gym and being
like not just going to the gym to like
be healthy but like they're buff right
because that's one of the very few
acceptable ways for men to be men in
modern society right because the things
that we conven would associate with
masculinity you know strength confidence
aggression dominance Etc they're kind of
looked down upon for guys nowadays right
um and so well at least I can go to the
gym and I can look buff right it's so
true I was just thinking about the
people my father might have looked up to
he's from Coventry and when I from my
memory of his idols they were like rock
stars in bands yeah they were like
skinny like probably smoked some weed
they all had long hair my dad had long
hair as well like this down to his
shoulders when I saw some old photos of
him and I imagine his version of like
the Andrew Tate was that I know the lead
singer of like the Beatles or whatever
yeah or his favorite rock band but
you're right all of our people we look
up to in society they probably do
Brazilian jiu-jitsu right they go to the
gym yeah there's some they fight in some
way yeah boxing UFC whatever and it's
much you know because I think that's one
of the reasons that the UFC is crushing
it as hard as it is I mean Dana why is a
brilliant business guy and it's a great
product and it's fascinating but I think
one of the reasons there such an
obsession with combat sports nowadays is
that it's like well at least I can see
like men being men type of thing do you
know what I mean cuz nowhere else am I
going to get that I think that's it's
undoubtedly to me a kind of like
misplace misplaced masculinity or maybe
it's not misplaced it's just like the
one place you can actually see it you
know and you're allowed to celebrate
masculinity in that way the the hyper
masculinity it's a very interesting
moment that we're in is is there a
solution that you can see to the issues
that men are facing in the sort of
modern world where suicide rates are
through the roof loneliness depression
look the solution for men is always
going to be the same uh which is to be
better to do better to work harder to
learn skills to grow to develop uh to
look for mentors to look for guidance uh
and to do things it's always going to be
the way like no like I said no one's
coming to save you and this is uh this
is why victimhood that we talked about
earlier it's especially bad for men CU
you know we feel sorry for women we
don't really feel sorry for men right so
if a woman is a victim everyone wants to
like go and help her and support her and
it's natural and understandable there's
a very good evolutionary reasons for
this I think um which is men are
biologically disposable basically um you
know if you have a tribe of 10 men 10
women you send the men off to war one
comes back you can replenish the tribe
and that's a one very lucky dude if if
you do it the other way around and you
send the women off to war you're screwed
right and so um men are kind of
disposable we didn't evolve to feel
sorry for them and so for guys again
like you just got to do stuff and be
better and yes you've been dealt a bad
hand you have compared to the previous
generations where like men were in
charge and all of that you're going to
have to find a way and wokeism um and
sort of I guess political correctness
and Council culture and all these things
are much of the weapons that are used to
put men in those situations you would
argue yeah uh but you know I I think
with I always worry when we have these
conversations that um to say that
men young men especially younger than me
I think have a bad deal is often like
people try and immediately shove you in
some kind of box like you're some men's
rights blah blah blah I just think
that's an observable fact and the reason
I think it's important is um that men
and women need to work together mhm men
and women have had to work together for
the entire history of human existence
one of the terrible things about
wokeness is that it creates these
divisions between men and women you know
men are this women are that and you see
the the the response to that from the
aggressive masculine side now or women
are all this and women are all that
actually the thing that men and women
really need more than anything is each
other they need to work together that
operates at the level of your
relationship with your girlfriend my
wife but broader Society too like we
have different skill sets we are
naturally inclined to towards different
things we have to find ways to work
together better um and so when one side
suffers there was a time when women were
treated very badly a lot of them that
wasn't good uh treating men badly isn't
going to work out well either what you
really need is finding ways for men and
women to be healthy together in
relationships um and so that's I think
important to say that that's the
objective if that's the goal if that's
the objective that we're holding up then
the question is how do we get there and
and question the answer to that is not
to point fingers at the other sex and
say they are this and they are that but
to go well men are naturally aggressive
and dominant and Status seeking and all
of this stuff and let's find ways to
channel that into effective things like
we need guys to like stand on
construction sites and Hammer [__] into
the ground and all of that um and we
need women to do other things that are
more natural to them I mean look once
you have a kid and you start taking them
to like Nursery you find find out that
you know there is no gender equality in
a kindergarten it's like mostly women
that run that place and that's the way
it should be and that's that's makes
sense so um we have different
inclinations different skill sets it's
not to say there aren't exceptions of of
course there are right but generally
speaking we need to work together that's
the point yeah I think even um
mentioning that there might be
biological differences in male and
female is where people like the you know
those that are looking for
watery they come out in but I think
anyone in their private relationship can
very clearly State the differences
between men and women and as you say
they're not sweeping and there are
exceptions but how beneficial I don't
know anything about you we've just met
but I
imagine your girlfriend's Been
instrumental in your life would that be
fair to say of course I wouldn't be
anywhere near where I am without my wife
like and we both reap the benefits of
that I'm sure that's the case with you
that's how it's supposed to work on an
individual level and at the level of
society holding each other up filling in
gaps like the first time I remember you
know something when I was young when I
was about 20 like full of testosterone I
remember watching my mom resolve a
conflict with a joke and a smile and to
me it was like magic I was like whoa you
can do that and then I that was a
helpful thing for me to learn you know
but in my masculine boarding school kind
of environment you'd never do that right
it was all about who can like win and
fight and dominate and whatever we're
useful to each other we can learn from
each other that's the attitude that we
should have towards each other and the
other sex I love the what the term you
use there when you said hold me up
because that's exactly what my partner
does for me right and I think she'd
probably say the other the same for her
sure which I think it goes to your point
about what it should be this s Mutual we
fill in the blanks in each other's maps
of the world in emotional states there's
certain emotional states that I find
very hard to get out of my wife can come
in and be like boom boom boom done and
vice versa right and they're not the
same we've been told the lie that men
and women are the same what about
problematic men like Harvey Weinstein
and stuff like yeah terrible of course
the the whole me too movement exposed
this wave of like I someone on my
podcast said it was at the
neuroscientist America he said um we've
called men out but we need to make sure
we call them back in if that kind of
makes sense well I think the mistake we
made was we called Mana instead of
calling toxic Mana in the same way that
people who are itical of women now they
will point to certain female traits or
certain female people who behave in ways
that are very toxic and they will
broaden and generalize from that onto
all women right Harvey Weinstein does
not represent me in fact throughout
history people like him would have
actually been dealt with by Good Men and
prevented from acting in that way right
I guess the argument is that it is all
men because you're having those
conversations in your group chat and
you're not not checking your uh your
friend or your I don't know Harvey's
friends didn't check him what kind of
group chats are you reading this is what
the this is what I see online as like
right but that makes absolutely zero
sense this is this is the thing is like
if you want to generalize about an
entire group of people generally
speaking we think that's a bad thing to
do like if you were to do that about
pakistanis people wouldn't be be into
that right if if I was to do that about
black people nobody would be into that
but the moment it's men suddenly that's
that's totally cool now now we're going
to do this doesn't make any sense free
speech is at the heart of this right
because we're talking about social media
platforms the ability to express ideas
and not be scared um free speech has
been on a bit of a journey over the even
the last 10 years I think if you just
looked at where we were 10 years ago and
then five years ago and then the
pandemic and then now it feels like all
four of those moments were in a
different place what what's your
observation of that story AR Free Speech
well it's all very contextual right and
depends where you are uh what you do and
what your opinions are um one thing
people forget give you one brief example
right because people a lot of people
make free speech a political issue they
say well this side cares about it
because they want to say their stuff and
this side doesn't care about it because
blah blah blah right during the pandemic
when the vaccine came out in America the
person who was pushing the vaccine was
Donald
Trump and people who were opponent oon
of his on the left said I'm not taking
Trump's vaccine blah blah blah blah blah
blah blah right the moment the
presidency changed suddenly you couldn't
criticize the vaccine right and suddenly
you know you wanted to kill people if
you had some reservations about some
things about it right so free speech
usually and always has been really uh is
a weapon that people like to use against
the other side which is why you need
people in the middle to to kind of be
the referee and say guys I don't care
which one of you is in power now we
always need free speech so that we can
criticize the people in power not the
right or the left but the people in
power whoever that is now from about
2014 onwards particularly I think there
was a lot of restriction of speech uh
from the left from the progressive left
um and that was part of wokeness and by
the way just for for your uh your
audience I think it might be helpful I
always say this because people don't
know this where the term political
correctness comes from people think
political correctness is you know let's
be let's not be mean to people let's not
offend minorities let's not make
offensive jokes blah blah blah never had
anything to do with that political
correctness was invented in the Soviet
Union by Communists so that they could
say to critics of the Communist Regime
well comrade what you're saying may be
factually correct but it's Politically
Incorrect and therefore you should shut
up in other words it's inconvenient to
the party line of the the day and that's
how political correctness is used always
it's about preventing you from
expressing a dissenting opinion um so
from 2016 onwards you saw lots of that
uh especially on social media because uh
the kind of progressive left had a lock
on all of those institutions Facebook
Twitter uh Instagram we can go down the
full list they panded I'm not saying the
people who ran them were themselves
necessarily work but they p Ed and
appeased that Fringe who said you can't
say that that's hate speech you can't
say that that's and during the pandemic
we saw real restrictions on it I
understand why the pandemic killed a
hell of a lot of people there was a hell
of a lot of lies being told by people of
all different sides um I was
uncomfortable with the level of
censorship we saw though I thought that
a lot of very reasonable things were
prevented from being talked about one of
them was where the virus came from we
now know with almost certainly it came
from a lab in China due to almost
certainly gain of function research um
Matt Ridley for example he he in the
House of Lords in the UK so he's not
some Fringe random guy wrote a whole
book with a Chinese scientist Alina Chan
I think her name is uh we've had him on
the show to talk about this if you'd
said that on social media in the early
days of the pandemic you would have been
banned now we know that's almost
certainly what happened and it's really
important where the virus came from for
obvious reasons which is if it came from
a lab where these people were messing
around with viruses don't we want to
know that because could happen again
might right um so free the Restriction
of free speech is dangerous for all
sorts of reasons um and then Elon Musk
bought Twitter and I think since then
we've seen that you know um a friend of
mine's um very fond of saying that zero
is a special number and what he means by
that is when you control every single
media Outlet in the world m of that type
social media you are able to censor
everything but the moment one of those
Outlets is not controlled by you
censorship becomes pointless because
people can go to the other platform and
see the things for themselves right
which is one of the reasons Mark
Zuckerberg has come out recently and
said that they were wrong to ban Donald
Trump from Facebook and Instagram and
they were wrong to suppress the hunter
Biden laptop story and all of that kind
of stuff and that they wouldn't do so
again because now now that there is a
platform where that censorship is not
happening he looks kind of bad in this
whole thing right um so I think Elon
buying Twitter and opening up the range
of conversations has had some very
positive effect it's also had some
negative effect undoubtedly uh and that
is a thing that you know I think a great
engineer like Elon will hopefully
fine-tune over time um what is the
negatives of well look the amount of
horrific [__] that people say on there
now is is increased exponentially
undoubtedly right and the answer to that
might not be that they need to be banned
or censored it might be what he said
originally he talked about freedom of
speech but not freedom of reach like you
know maybe you know my view as someone
from a Jewish background is I don't want
people being banned from social media
for being anti-semitic but should they
be promoted actively on social media for
being anti-semitic should we flood the
internet with that Maybe not maybe like
they can say what they want but maybe it
shouldn't be to the broadest possible
audience or what whatever it looks like
right like I don't think we want a space
where people are encouraged to be
hateful and it sometimes does feel like
that on social media one of the big
problems is of course anonymity right
it's like that windscreen effect in the
car you get in your car someone has cut
you up in traffic the the things you do
and say are not the things you would say
to someone face to face MH and if you
have complete online anonymity it
encourages people to be the the worst
version of themselves um how you resolve
that we don't know it's a complicated
problem I mean social media is a giant
conundrum um personally I am still
despite all that horrible [__] on the
side of like the opening up is good we
don't want people being banned for
expressing the wrong opinion about you
know the pandemic the vaccine the
whatever unless they're really being
nefarious um there's a balance to be
found we haven't found it yet when you
look at all solutions as just having
tradeoffs yeah I think it makes a lot
easier to accept that we'll never be
happy with this and if you arrive at
that position then um then that's a
Thomas Soul line by the way oh was
actually yeah man you would love his
books I promise you I've written his
name down so I'm going to have to have
to dig in um and everything you said I I
have seen so I've seen a rise in
commentary that I think has really been
beneficial and I've also seen the nword
more times on my timeline than like I
ever would have seen before or like
horrific stuff um so the idea of freedom
of speech but not freedom of reach might
be the best solution and look it's a
terrible thing to say but maybe maybe
maybe you know the trade-off of a free
Society is some people are going to say
things you and I both really don't like
you know uh the question is should they
be front and center of the biggest
social media platform in the world maybe
not but as I say I think these are it's
a technical issue uh and as you say
there are trade-offs to to both ways of
handling it uh I believe that social
media is a very new thing we will find
the solution it's going to take some
time I just hope it doesn't break our
brains in in the meantime are you if we
look forward 5 10 20 years do you think
the West will still be
dominant I think in that timeline yes
because the accumulated Advantage we
have is very
significant um
but you know that thing about how did
something end gradually and then
suddenly H we're not on a good
trajectory and you know when we talk
about you know the decline of the West
people imagined like you know and then
one day everybody died this is not what
I'm talking about but have you been to
Rome yes yeah have you been to Athens no
okay well they're the same thing you
walk out of the the tube station in
central Rome and you see this Coliseum
and it's incredible and you think what
an amazing civilization then you look
around and there's Italians and they're
wonderful people and they have a great
time and whatever but those are not the
same thing the Roman Empire in Italy are
not the same thing um great
civilizations come to an end um and the
and they come to an end when they decide
they are no longer willing to fight for
their future and what does that mean in
reality if it comes to an end as in if
the West becomes you know secondary to
China or Russia what does that mean for
for me and you decline in living
standards uh we are going to be dictated
to by other countries in the way that we
currently dictate to them uh what they
should do what they shouldn't do where
they can have their power centers where
they can't um it will mean that our our
children are not as prosperous and not
as free as as you and I have been um and
it will mean that the values of the West
which are ironically the things that
woke people care about so much human
rights equality of treatment all of
those those things will will fall to the
way side because you know in Russia or
China the attitude to gay people or
ethnic minorities is nothing like what
we have here and so that's what I keep
trying to say to people like look I
agree with you when when you say we know
we need to treat people of different
backgrounds equally and we need to be
fair and we need to be kind to people if
that's what you care about the thing you
should really really do is do everything
you possibly can to save the West
because the moment the West is not
dominant those values will not be
considered values at all what could I do
to save the West okay remove the podcast
okay Stephen before the podcast what
could I do as an individual listening to
this to save the West teach your
children how lucky they are take them
abroad show them the rest of the world
show them what people live like in poor
countries around the world and remind
them how fortunate they are and then
explain to them where it all comes from
and it comes from the fact that we have
developed designed invented found the
magic formula for Human Society at least
the best one that humans have invented
so far freedom of expression freedom of
research freedom of speech capitalism uh
private property the rule of law um and
the idea that uh you know we talked
about religion I think it comes largely
from Christianity that we we all have
dignity by virtue of Being Human um uh
those are the things that have driven
our society to the tremendous success we
have to the technological progress
people don't realize that but you know
without freedom freedom of research
freedom of expression you don't have the
technological progress that we we have
and then you don't have the dominance
that we enjoy because our dominance is
almost entirely based on the
technological progress we're not the
most populist civilization in the world
we don't have the largest number of
people um we are prosperous because of
our technological advantages and they
come from the incredible opportunities
that people have to research things to
make things and then to profit from them
in a way that they don't have in other
societies uh teach your children that
their society is great teach them that
they live in one of the best places in
the history of the world uh that all the
[__] they''re being taught at school
is not true uh inoculate them against
these ideas my parents had to do this
with me when I was growing up in the
Soviet Union they before my first day at
school they said two things first do not
ever discuss anything we talk about in
the home at school because we'll all be
in trouble and two they're going to
teach you this this this is this this is
not true that's fine you don't have to
you don't have to argue with your
teacher just know that it's not true
here's why it's not true if you have any
questions talk to us you have to
inoculate your children against this
stuff and then they will be good
citizens then they will create things of
value to the society and they will
spread that message to others I was
thinking about you telling the story of
uh going to school and your parents
basically saying don't say that because
we'll be in trouble and and then I had a
little Flash in my head of some of the
recent headlines around people talking
on social media um and being arrested
for it now I know there's a big spectrum
of things people have been arrested for
for saying on social media but there are
some absurd things as well which make
everyone I think should give everyone
cause for concern yeah um but we don't
think of our society as one where we
could get in trouble for something we
tweet well the assumption that most
people make is well you probably got
arrested because you said something
horrific yeah um
and I understand why they make that
assumption but it's not always true uh a
lot of uh gender critical feminists for
example women who are concerned about
the invasion of women Spaces by trans
activists they've had issues with the
police uh there was a girl called
Chelsea Russell I don't know if you're
familiar with this case but she um she
post her friend was killed in a car
crash and she posted the lyrics of his
favorite song on her Instagram and
contain the nword uh it's a rap song uh
and she was prosecuted and found guilty
of a hate crime um and she I think it
took several years for her to win an
appeal against this but before that she
was like tagged she had a curfew lots of
lots of other things so because you put
rap lyrics in her Instagram by yeah
Chelsea Russell look her up um so when
you restrict what people can say in this
way you inevitably stray into areas that
for some reason currently are
controversial like the trans thing for
example uh and you punish people for
expressing you know sometimes not very
articulately but not everyone is
articulate sometimes people have honest
feelings and by the way you know should
it be illegal to be a dick I I don't
think so otherwise there' be hell a lot
of people getting arrested you know um
and I just think we should always h on
the side of freedom um we should always
ear on the side of allowing people to
express themselves even if what they say
we really don't like I mean that's what
our society is built on can I ask you a
question then do you think someone who
um says a racial slur online should be
arrested personally I don't know MH no
there is a context in which that might
be the case like if you're saying all
these nword should be killed that's a
different thing because you're inciting
violence but look I've been racially
abused in my life it's not pleasant but
like nothing happens do you know what I
mean yeah I don't think if someone just
said a racial slur they should be locked
in jail right um but obviously there
will be social consequences regardless
they're not going to be able to get a
great job for example like if you walked
into a pub and you you started you know
going off about some racial group most
people probably like be like who's that
dick and you know the landlord might ask
you to leave yeah that's normal societal
reaction your friends might stop being
friends with you that's perfectly
reasonable but do we need to criminalize
that behavior gosh slippery slope that
is I I think so I think so and and I
think the most important thing is if you
look around at countries in the world
where people are prevented from saying
things that other people don't like
where people are prevented from making
jokes that other people don't like those
are not the sort of societies that we
would want to live on our
emulate do you think this election which
is coming up in the US between Trump and
Kamala do you think it
matters every election matters in the
United States because it's the most
powerful country in the world and it's
the leader of the western world and also
because the gap between those two
candidates is so vast the Gap in terms
of their political views and in terms of
what they would do with the country in
terms of their perspectives their
attitudes yes I think is very important
do you for the woke um the eradication
of the sort of woke virus that you you
speak of um do you think one candidate
is more likely to achieve that than the
other it's very hard to say because k
has said a lot of things that are woke
um and she certainly would allow that
side to flourish more then again if
Donald Trump gets elected does that
provoke even more of a work backlash
because um you know the woke narrative
is America's racist and homophobic and
sexism whatever and when Donald Trump
gets elected that kind of reinforces
their ideas about reality and they
double down so I don't know the reality
I'm much more concerned about the war in
Ukraine I think that that needs to be
resolved um I have a lot of family in
Ukraine I really care about what happens
there your wife is Ukrainian my wife's
Ukrainian my mother's Ukrainian I spent
my Summers as a kid on my granddad's
Farm in Ukraine my grandmother 95 years
old still alive lives 100 kilometers
from the front line can't leave she
lived through the Nazi occupation and
now this um but more importantly for the
West I think it's a real test of uh the
West's resolve and that issue needs to
be resolved by someone I have said from
day one Ukraine would have to give
something away for long-term security
because there's no winning this war
which candidate is more likely to end
the
war well carela I look there's two ways
to play this right and both of them have
merits one way is you give the
ukrainians way more support than we're
currently doing so they can actually
make advances that's one way to handle
it the other way is you accept Where We
Are and you say to Putin you've got two
choices my friend one is we do a deal
that's fair to you and that's fair to
the ukrainians and the most important
thing is that the ukrainians get
long-term security that means because
you remember in 2014 this has already
happened Russia already bit a piece off
Ukraine in
2014 and but even at that point Ukraine
had security guarantees from Western
countries which were not executed on
right they were not on we promised them
safety and we didn't give them safety so
the most important thing in this outcome
is that there's a physical barrier
between Ukraine and Russia so that this
can't happen again so either that's
membership of NATO not going to happen
or more likely some kind of Korean style
demilitarize Zone with peacekeeping
troops on the border
right if you don't want to do that
Vladimir then we will give you cran
everything that's the threat that's the
deal you have to do
out of the two candidates I think Donald
Trump is probably more likely to get
that outcome
uh it's not to say I like everything
about Donald
Trump but on that particular issue I
think he would be the the candidate I
would put more faith in to sort it
out for all the businesses and
entrepreneurs out there listening you
know how challenging it can be to reach
the right people especially when it
comes to B2B marketing that's why I'm
excited to share that LinkedIn ads who
sponsor this podcast have the solution
for you in B2B you're not just doing
business with one person you're dealing
with buyer groups who are teams of
people making decisions together
LinkedIn ads allows you to reach a vast
Professional Network of over a billion
members including a 100 million decision
makers and 10 million cwe Executives who
make up these buying groups you can
precisely Target them by job title
industry company and more with LinkedIn
ads targeting and measurement tools
built specifically for B2B you'll be
able to drive results and build
meaningful relationships it's no wonder
linked to is the highest returning paid
social platform to help you get started
LinkedIn ads have kindly offered a $100
credit to launch your first campaign so
go to linkedin.com doac 24 to claim your
credit that's linkedin.com doac 24 terms
and conditions apply what have you
changed your mind about that mattered
interesting I think one of the things
I've changed my mind most about is
business as trigonometry has become more
successful and we start to employ people
um I've understood things that I didn't
really used to understand about taxes
and incentives and stuff like that I
mean I don't know if you know this but
Britain more millionaires are leaving
the UK than any other country in the
world at the moment really yeah yeah and
that's because we have a very bad
business environment we keep talking
about you know we need to raise taxes on
the rich and whatever what I never
really understood is a a tremendous
amount of wealth is created by business
people and when you tax them what
happens is they stay rich but they stop
employing as many people they stop
giving jobs to other people uh and so I
never really understood wealth creation
very well before it's really interesting
yeah it's a big topic of conversation at
the moment in both the US and the UK
that like capital gains tax and cor
Corporation tax um and you know it's a
raging conversation in society which is
we just need to tax like the rich and
the business people more and then one
side says no don't do that because we're
creating wealth and opportunities and
jobs and the other side says no you're
buying a private jet and a and a yacht
yeah I think in the UK it's particularly
bad because there's a kind of attitude
to money here that's that's a little bit
class warfish in a way you know what I
mean and and for good reasons probably
because you know this country had a
landed gentry these were people who were
Rich because they were Rich because
their dad was rich basically right um
and so we when we think of wealthy
people we don't think of successful
people we think of privileged people um
but most people who have money are not
like that most people have have money
because they've created things that are
of value to other people but we get
those two things confused quite often uh
and most people I know who are wealthy
and successful they don't buy private
jets they pour all their money that they
have into bigger better you know hiring
more people you know when we have more
money the trigonometry we hire another
person because we want there's more [__]
for us to do that we want to do that
we're not yet doing um then the on other
things you know I used to be incredibly
libertarian on drug
policy I used to think that you know
people should be take what you know
freed to take whatever drugs they want I
still think that about certain drugs but
I also think there are certain drugs
that are just so incredibly addictive
particularly to people who are already
vulnerable that they shouldn't be
criminalized I think for taking them I
think they should be given help they
should be this should be treated as a
mental health issue um but I I've become
slightly less Le less Affair about it uh
I think
and then with everything else I've just
that point you made earlier which is
Thomas Soul thing about there are no
Solutions only tradeoffs every time I
look at any issue I just realize that
most of the things that we argue about
are unsolved because they're difficult
to solve and there's very difficult
things on on both sides of the argument
and quite often we look at things from
an ideological perspective and that
ruins things take an America they
they're obsessed politically about
abortion right you know these people
argue that people women should be
allowed and the very good reasons to
argue that these people argue what the
sanctity of human life which I think is
a very good valid reason
too and we can have those arguments and
we're going to stay exactly where we'
stayed for however many
decades there are countries in the world
Hungary for example where they have a
very right-wing government who didn't
want to make abortion a political issue
what they did instead is they made
Family a political issue they encouraged
people people to have families
financially they give people all kinds
of tax breaks and help them get on the
housing ladder if they have kids and
they've hared the number of abortions in
half without Banning abortion right so
that's a practical solution to an issue
that is not going to get resolved by
people arguing about it from an
ideological position and I just think
there's so many like tricks like that
that can be found if we're willing to be
interested in pragmatism instead of
ideology it's interesting because when
you use the abortion example I go you
know I think a for a lot of people in
politics this abortion subject is like a
political weapon now yeah and the I
think often the same about the Border I
think if I was trying to get you to vote
for me and I was um I need to represent
a bunch of things and if those things
scare the [__] out of you or create
create some kind of disgust they're
probably going to work sure so if I say
there's rapists coming across the border
who are taking our daughters or you know
and they're sending that from mental
institutions M and they're coming for
your daughter and I'll stop it it's like
a compelling now you know sure and also
I heard Trump talk recently about some
of the the abortion subjects and talking
about ripping live babies out that at
nine months and and I just think God
that language is so tempting well
they're trying to win votes having said
that Trump is is actually very moderate
by Republican standards on the abortion
issue he's actually getting the tagged
from his own side for it um look I think
on immigration we talked before about
how different levels of immigration are
appropriate to different times America
in particular has a very rich history of
welcoming people from all over the world
uh the problem that both Britain and
America and other European countries
have is illegal immigration there is no
reason that should be happening there's
there's literally zero reason that
people should be walking into this
country um without being checked without
knowing who they are um and there it's
happening on a vast scale and I give you
an example this is just anecdotal of
course but it's representative a big
issue when I was in last time I was in
LA all the taxi drivers the lift drivers
in LA are Armenian okay yeah Armenians
speak Russian Armenians know that
Constantine is a Russian name so I'd get
in the lift they' be oh Constantine
start speaking Russian to me none of
them know who I am so we get chatting
whatever basically the ones that came to
America in the 80s and 90s they all came
by applying for Reves or following the
rules the guys have come since then
they've all come through the southern
border really yeah it's not Mexicans
fleeing cartel oppression mostly it's
people from all over the world um and
this guy was telling me was like oh yeah
yeah yeah I brought my cousins over I
brought my my dad over he's 883s in a
wheelchair no problem we're just got him
over what's the harm what's the harm
yeah of illegal immigration of him
coming over and taking that job as a
lift driver there's no harm of him
lift driver other than there's lots of
people who are following the law and
applying and not coming in because that
person has jumped a queue you can't have
people coming in
illegally you it's against the law it's
like saying what's the harm of someone
committing a crime well the harm is
they're breaking the law right first and
foremost secondly people break the law
on purpose the reason they break the law
is that we probably wouldn't LED them in
otherwise so that means we've thought
about what kind of immigration system we
want to have we've voted for people who
put in the laws that we wanted I mean
this idealized version of reality but
you get what I'm going with this um and
then we say well we want these people to
come in but we don't want everyone to
come in we want only these people
because they have the right skills the
right qualifications the right whatever
and what's happening is we're not
letting them in some of them and we're
letting people in that we never wanted
in the country in the first place then a
lot of them are coming for example this
country I don't know the latest figures
but under the conservatives we were
spending 8 million pound a day
every day in Britain on housing for
illegal immigrants who were coming over
from other countries right why should
the British taxpayer be spending 8
million pound a day to put people up in
hotels what's the rationale for that I'm
open to hearing it I still don't know if
I'm clear on the harm that that if lots
of people like that cab driver came in
through the southern border I know it
breaks the law yes um I want to get
really clear on the the do you want a
large population of people whose First
Act of coming to your countries to break
the law How likely do you think those
people are to pay taxes to contribute to
society more
broadly less likely than someone who was
from that country yeah so it would the
har is and especially less likely so to
than someone who would have come legally
by applying for a Visa and getting that
visa and getting a job so if they all
abided by the law and paid taxes would
there be no other harm well we were
getting to the harm so the harm is not
all of them are like the lift driver and
we have no way of sorting them one from
the other right so when you have large
levels of illegal immigration one of the
things that happen is nefarious actors
abuse that so people come in who are uh
some of them are criminals some of them
are terrorists some of them are just
violent you know Abdula zidi who threw
acid over that woman and her children
recently in the UK he was an illegal
immigrant he came in here on a lry he
was supposed to have been deported twice
and then suddenly decided you know what
I'm a Christian he converted and then we
we let him stay and then he attacked the
woman and two children withd are people
crossing the borders more statistically
committing crime than people who are
there legally we don't know interesting
because we don't know how many of those
people there are people will say well
you know actually immigrants commit
crime or how do you know how do you know
how many illegal immigrants there are h
this is what I always think cuz I I
watched all of the commentary around the
elections and I watch every debate and I
know it's on tonight and I watch
everything and I always hear about like
the acid attack yeah now that's horrific
it makes me get get goosebumps when I
think about it but there's also acid
attacks going on from people that were
born here so I'm trying to really
understand if I'm being brainwashed by
like an extreme oh my God it's awful in
that emotional feeling you get when you
hear that story or statistically there's
significance here and that's why I as
the question I'm is this an anomaly
which is being used to like look over
here or is it the the norm that illegal
immigrants are criminals sure but why
would we take the risk of having people
come here who are deliberately breaking
the law does that is that a signal of
good intent on their part do you know
what part of it is is I go oh God if I
was in you know inert country yeah I'd
give it a go my was bad I'd give it a
[__] go wouldn't you sure well I'm a
first generation England yeah yeah I was
born in Botswana yeah oh were you I yeah
yeah I was born in Botswana so my half
of my siblings were born in Manchester
but me and the youngest were born in
Botswana my mom's Nigerian so and I
think if I was in Botswana and I heard
this like Disneyland of the UK portrayed
to me on a TV whatever I'd give it a
shot I interviewed Francis inani yeah oh
did you amazing guy yeah amazing guy I
speak to him on WhatsApp sometimes and
hearing his story that he was in was it
Cameroon and he Walked Out Of Africa
swam to like tried swimming got a boat
tried climbing the walls etc for years
and years walked through the desert and
then makes his way to to I think it
Spain and then gets to France becomes
the greatest of all time in UFC you go I
I wouldn't agree with that noones is the
greatest he's the greatest of all time I
meant to say the heavyweight champion of
the world of the world he's incredible
fighter just the most incredible Story
the fact that that fight has didn't
happen is the worst it's just a crime
yeah anyway your point is
you would do it yes and you're a a
valuable member of our society that we
need sure uh but what the point I'm
trying to make to you is first and
foremost people act like that's the
choice right either we let Francis and
Ghana drown in the
Mediterranean or we let him in illegally
that's not what I'm advocating for this
is where a lot of this conversation
breaks down the actual solution to this
like with the abortion thing that we
talked about there are practical
solutions to this that actually make
sense what you do is you set set up
Refugee processing centers in the local
areas where there are conflicts where
there's all sorts of turmoil going on
people can apply there and then be
selected or not selected based on their
circumstances because you like you said
there are no Solutions only tradeoffs we
can't let everyone in the world who is
poorer than us into our country can we
no can we agree on that yeah I'm not I'm
not I know you're I'm just saying I'm
just taking you through the argument I'm
not saying you're saying that so that
means we have to limit number of people
we allow in is that fair yes okay
therefore we then have to choose who we
let in is that fair yeah okay therefore
illegal immigrations unacceptable does
that make sense yeah okay because if we
want to help people from poor parts of
the world where they're being mistreated
and oppressed we have to get them to
form an orderly line in those areas give
them an opportunity to apply for Asylum
then pick the ones that we think are the
most likely to not be terrorists not be
criminals they have a genuine case that
they need our help that they're most
likely to contribute to our society if
they break out of the queue and Run and
Jump the wall and get in yeah do you
have empathy for them of course and can
you blame them no no it's and I think
this is the kind of nuance and issue
which some people sometimes don't
highlight which is and I mean if you
think about what's happened on the
streets of the UK recently it's been
attacking them like going to the hotels
where they they've been put trying to
burn the hotels burning down Asylum
centers and hotels is moronic and people
shouldn't do it and they should go to
prison for doing it and people can't see
the difference no they can't you know I
mean it's like you stole my job yes well
yes and I don't think I I I think sadly
what happens is when people lived in
deprived communities where they don't
have jobs and it's not because someone
stole them it's just because those
communities were de-industrialized or
whatever they get deprived and people
lash out U and it's terrible and it
shouldn't happen and they always look
for escape go and that scape is always
going to be somebody like that that does
not mean that we should have an open
border for illegal immigration right so
the question is can we let everybody in
that would want to come here the answer
is no as we agree that means we have to
be selective that means we have to
choose who comes and who doesn't that
means we are going to have to reject
some people we can still have empathy
for them and understanding for them but
it's like you have a front door in your
house and there are thousands of
homeless people in London
what if one of them broke into your
house and started stealing stuff to sell
you would have empathy wouldn't you not
a lot judging by your face but you would
have some okay let me try and add some
more color to this analogy what if I
needed people in my house to make it
function and um okay good analogy so
let's say you need someone to build you
an extension like I need like a cleaner
a chef you need a you need a cleaner you
need a chef and you need someone to
build an extension so you need a bunch
of people yeah
and you put out a job advert right and
some people reply and you're like cool
I'll pay you this much you come in you
sort out my extension you do my cleaning
you do my cooking blah blah blah
okay they're turn scheduled to turn up
on Monday and then on Sunday a bunch of
people break into your
house and start doing all that stuff you
don't know who they are you don't know
what their qualifications are they break
down the front door and walk in mhm
would would you be cool with that no
right so in the same way that we have a
front door on our houses because we want
to decide who comes in and out of our
houses we have a front door on our
countries I agree I think illegal
immigration for all the reasons you've
said is not is not acceptable and um the
part that I where I get pulled a little
bit is where I see the illegal
immigrants being demonized whereas what
nothing to do with them yeah which is
what but it's almost impossible and
there's so many issues in society like
this where if you talk about the issue
and really talk about the issue there
will be some important conversation
happening here then you'll have some
people come to the issue and see it as
an opportunity to Fan The Embers and the
people that fan The Embers cause people
Downstream to misunderstand the issue
and then start wars below so the point
the conversation we're having about
immigration is a I think is a productive
conversation but then if if someone you
know uses that as a as a way to get into
Power by saying that someone is coming
to rape your children or they're
stealing from you or all these things
they've taken your job they're the
reason you're unemployed you know
they're the reason she she broke up with
you because you don't have a job now the
illegals um that then causes all of this
horrible Division and fighting below and
lots of like people get caught in the
crossfire that were just getting on with
their lives and good people 100% And
that's that's why it's so so unfortunate
we can't well we can we're doing it now
I think you and I I don't know what you
actually think but certainly in terms of
your arguments you're putting to me
you're coming from a different place and
I think we've got to the place that we
understand that I'm not anti-immigrant
yeah uh and I'm actually Pro immigration
in the sense that um well I'm I'm not
pro or anti-immigration sense it depends
on the time that you're in but generally
speaking I think when you choose the
people who come when they're culturally
a good fit for that society when they're
driven and talented and ambitious and
blah blah blah blah blah that is going
to be hugely beneficial to your country
um and I am for having legal immigration
at the level that is beneficial to our
society which is not zero legal
immigration I think can be very
conducive so not anti-immigrant
otherwise I'd have to be anti- me um but
at the same time I think illegal
immigration it just shouldn't be
happening yeah we agree and that's quite
rare actually the the the ability to say
that immigrants aren't bad people
they're not the the bad ones necessarily
they're not the ones to to demonize um
although of course there's exceptions
and that um legal immigration's good
legal legal immigration's bad well again
legal immigration can be good yeah right
uh if it's very large numbers of people
in a very short period of time that
becomes very difficult to digest for the
whole society and then then tensions
arise of the kind that you're talking
about so my view is you want to bring in
the right number of people you want to
make sure that they're able to integrate
make themselves at home learn the
language adapt and then you can bring
more people if that's what your Society
needs at that time what's the most
important thing we didn't talk about
that we should have talked about
hm it's a good question uh tradeoff
denialism
interesting tradeoff
denialism tradeoff denialism is people
who deny the very thing that we've been
discussing most of this conversation
which is you can't solve every problem
you can choose which tradeoff you get
and in a lot of our conversations we
talk about them as if there are no
trade-offs climate change which I talked
about in my Ox speech is a very good
example of this people say the planet's
about to burn therefore we must do
everything that we possibly can the
problem is that when you do the things
that they're suggesting you do a
terrible amount of damage to people you
make people poor especially in the third
world in the poor parts of the world um
and in our countries too um you know the
reason that people are living longer and
healthier lives is because we burn
fossil fuels in 1947 the average life
expectancy in India was 32
32 that's mostly because Jesus I just
turned 32 yeah so on average you would
have died by
now mostly in in infancy actually a lot
of it was infant mortality today it's
71 why because they're burning a hell of
a lot of f fossil fuels and getting
richer as a result right energy is what
makes our societies run it's why we are
living longer eating better all of that
when you pursue this idea called Net
Zero which is when we Outsource our own
emissions to other countries so we can
pretend that we're green we actually
create more CO2 around the world because
we're we're Outsourcing manufacturing to
other countries where they make things
dirtier and then we're shipping them
back MH right um that doesn't make the
world better it makes us feel better but
if your thing is well you know climate
change is the only thing that M it's the
only variable that we're optimizing for
then you do a lot of damage and it's the
same with almost everything else that do
so what's the solution with the climate
change challenge what how would you
approach it if we and presumably you
believe in the idea that in global
warming and climate change I guess yeah
well the world is warming and there
human beings do contribute to that as
far as I understand um it's not nearly
the catastrophe that we're being told
that it is not even remotely the
catastrophe that we're being told that
it is for a number of reasons one of
them is when the climate gets warmer
it's actually much better for human
beings within a certain range uh we it's
beneficial to Human Society we know that
from history um doesn't mean that we
want run away climate change mhm but
more people die from the cold than die
from warm from warm weather and from
warm weather related events one of the
things that we actually know is that far
fewer people are dying from climate
related disasters every year and that's
because our technology and coping with
them is getting better uh my view is
answer is technological uh we've got to
use way more nuclear power than we use
because it's carbon neutral to not
entirely but it's you need a lot less of
it uh you build a power station and
basically then it kind of runs itself
there's nuclear waste we'll find a
solution to that but the solution is
very simple we have to find a way to
make energy cheaper that's clean it's
really interesting actually I was just
thinking as you're speaking about the
call that Trump had with um Elon where
Trump's making his point about climate
change and then elon's kind of saying
well actually like climate change is a
real thing and okay it's we're not going
to the planet isn't going to burn in 5
years or 10 years but you know in with
within sort of a medium time Horizon we
do need to get carbon levels down and I
was just thinking as you was speaking I
was thinking God if if Elon wasn't
running
Tesla I think that the right who I think
have now kind of adopted Elon in some
respects would think about climate
change very very differently I think the
right do think about it very differently
I think climate is quite unpopular on
the right but but his presence there
means that people are openminded open
minded subject and look the the answer
to that issue like with every other
issue is to think about as a pragmatic
issue not as a religious issue which is
increasingly what it's become people
gluing themselves to roads and throwing
soup on paintings is not going to stop
climate change is my point we have a
closing tradition on this podcast where
the last guest leaves a question for the
next guest not knowing who they're
leaving it for and the question that's
been left for you oh in the D I didn't
know that
is what is one unfulfilled dream in your
life huh it's a good question
to have a large
family oh interesting so you've got one
child yeah and we'll probably squeeze
another ey if we're lucky but apart from
that that that will that will remain
unfulfilled I
suspect interesting yeah thank you so
much thank you so much for the work that
you do your your podcast has an absolute
cult trigonometry an absolute cult so
many my team members are really really
big fans of the show and I've watched so
many episodes predominantly clips that
I've seen and then I've got drawn in and
then TR tried to find the longer form
episode but it's um it's an
important uh last refuge for sense and I
and I really respect people like you
because I do think that you do a really
good job of navigating complex issues in
a way where I still have faith in your
process I still believe that you when
you approach these issues you're not
doing it because you're ideologically
contaminated in some way you're still
trying to approach them despite the
tempt and the external pressure with the
intention of pursuing truth and truth to
the to the means of making things better
and those are the people that I really
warmed to because it's difficult I
appreciate that man I feel seen as they
say oh good no but I that's that's the
goal you know uh it's one of the things
that we're very proud of is that as we
discussed in the main conversation you
know it's very very easy to make lots of
money and get lots of attention by
appealing to people's base instincts and
worst instincts to by pretending to have
more extreme views that you have um and
we've really done our best we are all
susceptible to it uh but we've really
done our best to operate from that place
bad faith changes everything and so does
good faith when you act in bad faith it
changes everything like this
conversation if you were acting in bad
faith we wouldn't have had the
conversation we would have had good
faith changes everything as well and
that's what we try to do it's what
you're clearly doing so anyway thank you
for having me and enjoy the hate you're
going to get it's okay thank you so
[Music]
much every single time you eat you have
an opportunity to improve your health
and that's why I love Zoe because Zoe
helps me to make the smartest food
choices for me and my body and as you
guys will know by now Zoe is a sponsor
of this podcast and I'm an investor in
the company and if you haven't tried Zoe
I highly recommend you do because Zoe
combines My Health Data with Zoe's
worldclass science and using those two
things Zoe guides me to Better Health
every single time I make a food choice
and eat which means that I have more
energy better sleep better mood and I'm
less hungry and the most important thing
is Zoe actually works it's backed by
their recent clinical trial something
called the method study which is the
gold standard of scientific research I
started Zoe just over a year ago now and
I've been able to track my progress week
after week so I can learn how to be even
smarter the following week and if you
haven't joined Zoe yet I'm giving you
10% off when you join Zoe now just use
the code ce10 at checkout isn't this
cool every single conversation I have
here on the Diary of a CEO at the very
end of it you'll know I asked the guest
to leave a question in the Diary of a
CEO and what we've done is we've turned
every single question written in the
Diary of a CEO into these conversation
cards that you can play at home so
you've got every guest we've ever had
their question and on the back back of
it if you scan that QR code you get to
watch the person who answered that
question we're finally revealing all of
the questions and the people that
answered the question the brand new
version 2 updated conversation cards are
out right now at Theon conversation
cards.com they've sold out twice
instantaneously so if you are interested
in getting hold of some limited edition
conversation cards I really really
recommend acting quickly
oh
[Music]